published by
International Federation of Robotics
Frankfurt, Germany
February 2024

POSITION PAPER

Next Generation Skills
HOW ROBOTS CREATE NEW JOBS
AND HELP TO FIGHT LABOR SHORTAGE

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

CONTENTS

In brief ............................................................................................................... 3
Robot adoption and staff shortage ................................................................ 3
Executive summary .......................................................................................... 4
10 key findings............................................................................................... 5
Deep dive.......................................................................................................... 6
Robot adoption .............................................................................................. 6
The skills gap............................................................................................... 11
A call to action ................................................................................................ 13
Appendix ......................................................................................................... 15
Online-links .................................................................................................. 15
Contact ........................................................................................................ 15

2

Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

IN BRIEF
ROBOT ADOPTION AND STAFF
SHORTAGE
Intro
As the world continues to face mounting labor shortages, robotics has emerged to address this challenge. In fact, the current
global robot installation base is at an alltime high of around 4 million units.
Robots fill gaps
According to a report by World Economic Forum, automation with robots can help fill labor
gaps and stretch scarce talent. In addition, robots and automation contribute to a needed
shift in the type of work that people do. They

perform tasks that are difficult or dangerous for
humans, such as heavy lifting or working in hazardous environments. However, it is important
to note that the shift towards automation will require upskilling and reskilling of the workforce.
Robots create jobs
It is a common misconception that robots will
replace humans; research shows that they will
instead alter existing jobs for the better while
also paving the way for newer, more interesting
positions. However, action must be taken by
stakeholders including governments, businesses, robot manufacturers, and educational
institutes to ensure that the industry is properly
equipped with resources to unlock next-generation skills.

Industrial robots modernize factories work worldwide. Source: World Robotics 2023

Position Paper | February 2024

3

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

4

Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
10 KEY FINDINGS
01. Labor shortages are a growing concern
worldwide: Baby boomers are entering retirement in substantial numbers and birth
rates declining: This will lead to long-term
workforce shortages. According to the
WHO, the proportion of the world’s population over 60 will nearly double between
2015 and 2050. On top of these demographic trends, there are employment shifts
that contribute to concerns of growing labor
shortages. Example for this was the economic trend called “Great Resignation” in
which mainly American employees voluntarily resigned from their jobs en masse.
Reasons for resigning included wage stagnation amid rising cost of living, limited opportunities for career advancement or longlasting job dissatisfaction.
02.Manufacturers around the world are
struggling to hire workers: In 2023, an average of 26% of all European manufacturing
entrepreneurs saw their production limited
by a shortage of workers. Eleven years before, talent shortage was only hampering
7%, as EUROSTAT reports. In the US, a total of 616,000 manufacturing job openings
could not be filled in August 2023. By 2030,
a lack of skilled labor will lead to a projected
2.1 million unfilled manufacturing jobs according to a study by Deloitte and the Manufacturing Institute (MI). Even Asian countries like Korea and Japan are struggling
and have set up visa schemes to attract foreign employees; many of these visas are issued to employees in the manufacturing
sector.
03. Robotic adoption has been skyrocketing
over the last decade. The total global installation base is now at 3.9 million units,
and grew at a CAGR of 13% per year from
2017 to 2022.
04. Robots cannot and will not replace the
human workforce. Rather, they will transform traditional manufacturing roles and job

Position Paper | February 2024

profiles over the next 10 years. IFR members predict that over 50% of manufacturing
operators will be working with robots in this
time. Robots will become “tools” for people,
handling Dull, Dirty, Dangerous, and Difficult work so humans can move to more
meaningful work. As robot interfaces become more intuitive, operators will also
learn how to program them even if they
have no prior programming knowledge.
05. Robotic adoption is also creating new
job profiles, including multidisciplinary
roles as well as deep domain experts. Examples of the former include Smart Factory
Managers responsible for overseeing the
entire automation supply chain, and Robot
Teaming Coordinators who must design
processes that integrate robotics into operations and optimize how humans and robots
work together. Examples of the latter are
Robot Debuggers and AI Optimization Experts.
06. A challenge of this magnitude requires action taken by multiple stakeholders. Governments must invest in the right infrastructure, policies, educational programs,
and workforce development.
07. Manufacturers, educational institutes,
and governments must promote attractive career paths in manufacturing for
young AND older workers, as well as develop lifelong learning programs for employees.
08. Manufacturers must involve their workforce in developing the best automation
strategies, plus ensure employees are reskilled and/or upskilled in new technologies.
09. Robot manufacturers should continue focusing on simplifying programming interfaces to allow easier, faster adoption.
10. Employees should actively seek out opportunities to upskill in advanced new
technologies and become involved in the incorporation of robots in existing processes.

5

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

DEEP DIVE
ROBOT ADOPTION
Intro
The past decade has witnessed an extraordinary surge in the adoption of robots: The
latest World Robotics report by the International Federation of Robotics proved a record high in industrial robot installations with
553,000 new units deployed around the
world in 2022. Since 2017, the operational
stock of industrial robots had been increasing by 13% on average each year. By region,
65% of the global operational stock were installed in Asia, 19% in Europe and 13% in
the Americas.
Front runners and newcomers
Certain industries are front runners for robotic
technology. The automotive sector, for instance, has been at the forefront of deploying
robots for decades. However, sectors like electronics, food and beverage production, and the
wide range of service robotics have rapidly
spiked. As robotic adoption continues to soar, it
is vital to understand how they are drastically
altering the manufacturing landscape, revolutionizing the way we perceive people and
productivity.

Declining costs for robot systems
An additional driver of robotic adoption is a generation of new low cost robot systems that deliver application opportunities next to the traditional robots. Many robot manufacturers are
now making it a priority to develop robots that
are e.g. easy to program and install, even for
first-time robot users. This reduces dependency on external robot programmers, making
robots more user-friendly and affordable than
before. In addition to this, lower prices for components have helped to reduce the cost of robot
deployment overall.
Technology Driving Robotic Automation
Developments in the technologies used for grippers, vision, and mobility are making it possible
to automate tasks that were not technically or
financially feasible. For example, robotic grippers have evolved substantially in recent years,
and many can now handle small, delicate, and
irregular objects. Similarly, innovations in vision
systems have opened the door to a world of
new applications by lending robots the ability to
“see”. With regard to mobility, many robot arms
can be mounted on mobile robot bases. This allows them to intelligently move around factory
floors, picking and placing objects, carrying
parts, tending machines, and more.

Figure 1: Programming and working with a collaborative robot. Image credit: Photoneo
6

Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

Figure 2: Programming of a SCARA robot. Image credit: Staubli

Collaborative Robots
The collaborative robot, or cobot, has also contributed to robotic adoption. These types of robots are designed to share the same physical
environment as people on the shop floor –
something that is not possible with traditional industrial robots for safety reasons. Cobots, however, have advanced built-in measures that enable them to slow down or stop entirely if a person is too close. This makes it possible to install
cobots without a cage or fence (following a
standard risk assessment), and they are therefore space-saving. Cobots are also usually
lightweight, so can be moved to new tasks as
needed.
Robots for Advanced & Flexible Automation

grippers and vision systems which are quick to
set up. This means robots can now be retasked quickly, ensuring that manufacturers are
more agile, responsive, and competitive.
Robots support better paid jobs
What do these changes mean for manufacturing employees? With increased reliance on autonomous machines, the natural concern is the
loss of jobs. However, our research has revealed that this is not the case. The essence is
this: Robotic automation represents significant
advantages for manufacturing workers. This includes a safer and more diverse work environment, opportunities to upskill and move into
higher-paying positions, and the promise of
working in a technologically advanced industry.

Flexible manufacturing is a production approach that enables efficient adaptation and
customization of manufacturing processes to
accommodate changing demands, product variations, and market conditions. It’s all about being able to quickly and easily adjust product
lines, equipment, and workflows to produce different products or quantities with little downtime
and cost. Newer robots enable this with their
ease of use, as well as some accessories like
Position Paper | February 2024

7

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

HOW MANUFACTURING ROLES
CHANGE
Intro
The increased adoption of robots and other
automation methods have already begun
impacting the skills needed across various
manufacturing roles. These requirements
will only continue to evolve, but in a way
that offers more job satisfaction and skill
development for employees at all levels.
Top 4 profiles - outlook over ten years
In the following section, we explore how the
profiles for the four primary manufacturing roles
of production operator, maintenance technician, engineer, and production manager are
transitioning with the rise of robotics and automation, including how they will change over the
next ten years.
01. Production Operators
Of the four role types, the IFR believes that the
role of production workers will change the
most over the next decade, with significant
benefits for them. The extent of change will
vary from company to company. Essentially,
automation technologies reduce the time and
effort production workers spend on Dull, Dirty,
Dangerous, and Difficult work. This gives them
the opportunity to learn new, interesting skills
related to managing these technologies instead, e.g. robot re-programming or training AI
algorithms.
Human talent for complex tasks
Complex tasks will largely be carried out manually by skilled production workers, while
smaller but technically uncomplicated production runs will be handled by employees with robot assistants doing physically exhausting
tasks. IFR members believe that more than
50% of welders, machinists, and assemblers
will be working with robots in ten years.
Engineering background not needed
In many large companies, production workers
are already using robots as tools, e.g. lifting or
holding parts in place so that the worker can
perform a process. After all, robots are increasingly easy to program and re-task for simple applications – even if first-time robot handlers just
go through a few hours of training. Some robots
can even learn from humans by demonstration.
8

An engineering background is no longer a necessity for robot programming, although experts may still be needed for complex tasks.
Plus, since robots are becoming more userfriendly, the IFR expects more small and midsized manufacturers to adopt robotic automation.
Workers train artificial intelligence (AI)
Workers will become increasingly involved in
training artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms
used for robotic applications such as pick-andplace. Workers demonstrate to the robot which
parts need to be picked/placed, and then supervise the robot’s activity to ensure the AI algorithm has been trained correctly. This can also
apply to robotic inspection systems, where the
worker can train the robot to distinguish between products that pass or fail the required
quality standards.
02. Technicians
An increasing number of machines are digitally
connected and constantly transmitting data on
their status. Analyzing this data enables manufacturers to detect useful information, such as
when to schedule maintenance on machines.
This digitization can also help identify the parts
that need changing so they can be ordered in
advance; previously this was only discoverable
after technicians dismantled the machine.
Technicians learn analytics skills
Through digitization, technicians can also access information on demand to quickly solve
problems. For example, by connecting machines including robots to the cloud, production
managers and technicians can constantly monitor them through smartphone-like devices. If
any error messages appear, technicians can
access a database of solutions to troubleshoot
the issue immediately. They can also access
data to look for variances that may have caused
the problem.
Monitoring machines
In addition to expanding their expertise with
specific machines, technicians are therefore
also increasingly acquiring broad information
technology skills. This allows them to interpret
digital data that represents physical machines,

Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

Figure 3: Using the teach pendant for programming, or touch up of previously made offline programs. Image
credit: Yaskawa.

and proactively monitor and assess that they
are working correctly.
03. Engineers
Digitization is also impacting the role of engineers. A focus area is design and development.
With computer-aided design and manufacturing
systems, engineers can create new product
models that automatically generate lists of the
required parts. Using digital twins allows engineers to simulate the integration of new machines into existing production settings, and
predict potential problems, such as the impact
of vibrations on accuracy. Additionally, 3D printing lets manufacturers quickly produce prototypes for testing before committing to expensive
production runs.
Changes affecting engineers
Over the next decade, engineers will turn to
managing connected systems, rather than isolated machines. This will require expertise in
electronics and software as well as digital technologies like IIoT or cloud-based systems on
top of traditional mechanical engineering skills.
This is already visible in relatively new roles like
Mechatronic Engineer, Mechatronic Technician, Systems Engineer, and Technician.
It also applies to existing roles. For example,
while robot technicians program robots, they increasingly require additional skills in interpreting computer-aided design simulations, data
analysis, edge computing, and more. Since engineers will be managing entire systems going
forward, they require an understanding of the
Position Paper | February 2024

interfaces and communications protocols between the backend of order systems and machine controllers, as well as the Internet of
Things (IoT).
04. Production Managers
In general, production managers today are increasingly asked to oversee a broader range of
machines and processes than before. They analyze data to get an overview and identify potential bottlenecks or find untapped optimization potential. As manufacturers embark on automating the entire supply chain, production
managers are also gaining broader technology
skills in related systems, such as enterprise resource planning (ERP).
Command center staff
In time, we may see the emergence of production control rooms where managers monitor
screens that display what is happening in the
supply chain in real-time. This could include the
flow of materials, production capacity, machine
yield, alerts for any machine malfunctions, and
the outflow of materials to warehouses for shipment. Command center staff can easily identify
issues and alert the relevant production staff to
resolve them.
Future is multidisciplinary
In general, we can observe that all four job profiles are gradually becoming multidisciplinary.
As production lines are increasingly automated,
manufacturing employees at all levels will need
basic knowledge across a wide range of
9

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

technologies. These technologies will become
increasingly intuitive to set up and use, but employees will spend more time applying technical
knowledge than in the past.

HOW THE FOUR MANUFACTURING ROLES WILL CHANGE OVER THE NEXT 10
YEARS
Production operators will:


Work with robots – IFR members estimate 50% will be working
with robots in 10 years’ time. Tasks include: Programing of simple applications: Monitoring robot performance: Working collaboratively with a robot ‘assistant’ or robotic tool,



Have the opportunity to learn new skills,



Work across a range of production lines or cells.

Technicians will:


Rely on data generated by machines, and analytic tools to assess when machines need maintenance,



Need broad information technology skills to interpret digital
representations of physical machines and search databases,



Start to take a proactive role in process optimization, exploring
how processes could be altered to function more efficiently and
avoid typical bottlenecks.

Engineers will:


Increasingly manage connected systems rather than discrete
machines,



Need expertise in electronics and software as well as traditional skills in mechanical engineering,



Require an understanding of the interfaces and communications protocols between back-end order systems and machine
controllers, as well as Internet of Things communications protocols.

Production managers will:

10



Oversee a broader range of machines and processes than in
the past,



Need broad technology skills in related systems such as enterprise resource planning (ERP),



May in future work in production control rooms managing employees who monitor screens showing the flow of materials,
production capacity, machine yield, alerts for machine malfunctions and output to warehouses for shipment. Will also perform
complex optimization tasks across the entire production line.

Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

Figure 4: Robot training in Thailand. Image credit: ABB

THE SKILLS GAP
Intro
As discussed above, automation leads to
the creation of new roles. In fact, most manufacturers today are unable to find talent
with the specialized skills required for the
sector. Statistics show that the situation will
only worsen. In the US alone, the manufacturing skills gap could result in 2.1 million
unfilled jobs by 2030, according to a study
by The Manufacturing Institute and Deloitte.
Young people wanted
It is also taking longer to hire manufacturing
workers across skills levels. Ongoing skills
training for the workforce is an important strategy to open up career opportunities. IFR members believe action should be taken to establish
and promote attractive manufacturing careers
especially to young people. This approach
should support girls in particular to develop their
abilities in STEM subjects and investigate options for a career in manufacturing.
Asia’s leading manufacturing countries Japan
and Korea have introduced foreign visa programs to combat the labor shortages they face.
A significant proportion of these visas in both
countries were issued to immigrant workers to
fill vacancies in their manufacturing sectors.

and 1964) retires, there will be an acute shortage of ‘classic’ manufacturing skills. Cedefop,
the European Center for the Development of
Vocational Training, predicts a shortage of 29
million technicians and associated professionals, as well as almost ten million plant, machine
operator, and assembler positions in Europe
between 2016 and 2030.
Manufacturers
It is important for manufacturers to understand
the central role of human employees, even in
an automated shop floor. Manufacturers must
include their workforce in developing the best
automation strategies, especially since it is production workers who have the best insights on
strengths and bottlenecks in production processes. In the US, for example, 53% of manufacturers are redesigning work around automation, and 40% are creating robot programming
roles. Similarly, about 50% of German manufacturers believe robotics will be an important
part of vocational training by 2025.
Upskilling
IFR believes upskilling is an integral factor.
Manufacturers must take more active
measures to train their current workforce in new
technologies and promote automation as a path
to more satisfying work. A recent survey found
that only a third of global companies are looking

Baby boomer retire
However, it isn’t just new technology and automation skills that are in short supply. As the
‘baby boomer’ generation (born between 1954
Position Paper | February 2024

11

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

Figure 5: Technicians monitor robot progress at Creative Revolutions. Image credit Universal Robots.

at reskilling existing employees, with the remaining preferring to simply hire new people to
fill the skills gap. Yet, 70% of those organizations that invested in reskilling say that the business impact from this has been greater than or
equal to the investment in them. One IFR member even found that upskilling the existing workforce led to a happier, healthier workplace culture. A better organizational culture is often also
a contributor to competitive advantage.
Easy to use robots
Perhaps one the most important pieces of
knowledge for employees to have is that automation is not intended to replace them. Instead,
their roles are intended to shift into more interesting and fulfilling work. Since using automation technologies no longer requires a bachelor's degree, employees can actively seek out
opportunities to upskill in these advanced new
tools.
Educational Institutes
The first way for educational institutes to contribute to closing the skills gap is by developing
vocational training centered around advanced
technologies such as robotics. However, the
IFR also recommends that educational institutes collaborate closely with manufacturers to
identify the existing gaps in manufacturing education, and strategize the most effective curricula and programs to address these gaps. This
12

would ensure real, industry-relevant programs
that actively tackle the skills gap.
Parents & Young Individuals
The manufacturing industry is often overlooked
when people consider career paths, but the IFR
urges parents and young people to actively explore and encourage opportunities in this sector. Technical degrees are no longer always a
necessity, which means individuals can easily
explore vocational education that can provide
an entry point into skilled manufacturing positions. Advanced automation technologies like
robotics also means the chance to have a career in STEM, and work in an industry at the
forefront of technological innovation.
Conclusion
The International Federation of Robotics believes that governments must update their education policies, and that robot programming is
now an essential skill all shop floor workers
must possess. Robot manufacturers are the
best possible partners to enable this transition.
After all, they have the expertise needed to educate and guide the talent pool on how to work
with intelligent automation systems. The IFR
strongly recommends and invites public authorities to team up with these experts in order to
jointly discuss and deliver the right education
for the workplace of the future.
Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

A CALL TO ACTION
WHAT STAKEHOLDERS CAN DO TO CLOSE THE SKILLS GAP
Parents



Encourage children - and in particular girls – to explore their abilities in
STEM subjects and investigate options for a career in manufacturing

Young people



Take an interest in STEM subjects and investigate career options building
off these subjects



Look into vocational education supported by manufacturers that can provide an entry into skilled positions in manufacturing



Promote the advantages of a manufacturing career at the forefront of technology development to young people through job trade fairs, PR and social
media campaigns and other recruitment drives



Collaborate with education institutes to adapt curricula to evolving demand
for technical skills



Promote employee development as a competitive differentiator



Encourage employees to take advantage of lifelong training programs –
and develop these programs internally, collaborating with education institutes



Actively seek out opportunities to learn new technologies and skills and,
where possible, develop skills across a range of technologies and expertise in the interfaces between them



Investigate training and certification options from multiple sources including equipment manufacturers, education institutes and government programs



Promote the advantages of a manufacturing career at the forefront of technology development to young people



Build robotics programming into vocational training for relevant manufacturing job profiles



Collaborate with manufacturers to adapt curricula to evolving demand for
technical skills



Ensure that mechanical and electronic engineering training programs include a focus on building ‘soft skills’, particularly critical thinking, analysis
and problem solving



Collaborate with government and manufacturers to develop lifelong training programs for manufacturing employees, particularly low-skilled workers



Work with manufacturers and educational institutes to develop and provide access to lifelong training schemes for workers.



Promote the benefits of automation for older, experienced workers



Develop programs and incentives to ensure lifelong learning



Provide incentives for manufacturers to collaborate with education institutes to develop training programs that incorporate cutting-edge technologies



Incentivize and support skills training for low-skilled workers

Manufacturers

Manufacturing
Employees

Education Institutes

Trade Unions

Government

Position Paper | February 2024

13

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

CALL TO ACTION

Conclusion

Fixing the skills gap

Automation is altering the face of manufacturing,
creating new opportunities for employees at all
skills levels. Job profiles of the traditional roles of
production operator, technician, engineer and production manager are changing rapidly. While new
positions with deep domain expertise in specific
technologies will be created, most manufacturing
employees will become technology generalists,
overseeing a range of technologies, machines and
processes. They are supported in their work by
data-driven analytic and decision-making tools
spanning the whole supply chain.

Fixing the skills gap will take a concerted, and
collaborative effort on the part of policy makers,
government, education institutes, manufacturers, and employees themselves. Lifelong learning is critical to ensure existing workers can
continuously re- and up-skill to take advantage
of new technologies. Manufacturers and education institutes have work to do to promote careers in manufacturing to young people as an
opportunity to work at the forefront of technology.

The future
It’s an exciting future, for both new and existing
workers, but a future whose potential will not be
realized unless urgent action is taken to address
an existing and future skills gap. As we have explored in this paper, it’s not just employees with
new technical skills who are missing. The retirement of skilled baby boomer manufacturing workers will create massive holes in the resourcing of
core manufacturing processes such as welding
and machining.

Figure 6: Training a pick and place robot. Image credit KUKA.
14

Position Paper | February 2024

NEXT GENERATION SKILLS

APPENDIX
ONLINE-LINKS
• OECD-Jobs Strategy
https://www.oecd.org/employment/jobs-strategy/
• Skills forecast: trends and challenges to 2030 (European Union)
https://www.cedefop.europa.eu/en/publications/3077
• National Association of Manufacturers (USA)
https://nam.org/2-1-million-manufacturing-jobs-could-go-unfilled-by-2030-13743/
• Industrie 4.0 – Qualification 2025 (VDMA, Sociology Department of the University of Hohenheim)
https://www.vdma.org/documents/34570/15841114/Summary_Industrie+4.0_Qualification+2025.pdf/965f4b69-da64-84cf-ddd4-785f0836b934?t=1620636433025
• Taking a skills-based approach to building the future workforce (McKinsey)
taking-a-skills-based-approach-to-building-the-future-workforce-vf.pdf (mckinsey.com)
• Go4Robotics – Robots are for everyone (IFR)
https://go4robotics.com/
• Position Papers (IFR)
https://ifr.org/papers
• World Health Organization (WHO)
Ageing (who.int)
• ToTalent
Europe’s manufacturing industry is struggling: 1 in 4 entrepreneurs experience ‘hampered operations’ - ToTalent
• US Chamber of Commerce
Understanding America’s Labor Shortage: The Most Impacted Industries | U.S. Chamber of Commerce (uschamber.com)
• The Manufacturing Institute
2.1 Million Manufacturing Jobs Could Go Unfilled by 2030 - NAM

CONTACT
Dr. Susanne Bieller
General Secretary
IFR International Federation of Robotics
Lyoner Str. 18,
60528 Frankfurt, Germany
Phone: +49 69 6603-15024
E-Mail: secretariat@ifr.org

Position Paper | February 2024

15

